README.md, before:

# M5StickC - WLED Audio Sync Source

This firmware for M5StickC uses the built-in SPM1423 PDM microphone to capture audio and sends it to WLED-enabled ESP devices via UDP for synchronized audio-reactive lighting effects.  
This firmware is built for the original M5StickC, and has not been tested with M5StickC Plus nor Plus v2

The code has been fully generated with Claude AI and has been tested for bugs.

## Features

**Automatic Gain Control (AGC)** - Automatically adapts to room volume  
**Built-in Microphone** - Uses M5StickC internal SPM1423 PDM mic  
**WiFi Configuration Portal** - Input wifi credentials in browser
**Real-time Display** - Audio levels and frequency spectrum visualization  
**Manual Controls** - Adjust gain, brightness, and transmission on/off  

## Requirements

- **M5StickC ** 
- **WLED Device** 
- **WiFi Network** - 2.4GHz 

## Installation

### Using Arduino Cloud Editor 

1. **Go to Arduino Cloud Editor**  
   Visit: https://create.arduino.cc/

2. **Create Account** (if you don't have one)  
   Free account required

3. **Install Arduino Create Agent**  
   - Small plugin (~30MB) that enables USB communication

6. **Create New Sketch**
   - Click **"New Sketch"**
   - Delete any default code

8. **Connect M5StickC**
   - Connect via USB-C cable
   - Select board: ESP32 Dev Module

7. **Copy the Firmware**
   - Copy the entire contents of `M5StickC_WLED_Audio.ino`
   - Paste into the editor

10. **Upload**
    - Click the **Upload** button (→ arrow)
    - Wait ~30-60 seconds
    - Look for "Success" message

### Alternative Installation Methods

This firmware can also be installed using ArduinoIDE or PlatformIO

## First Time Setup

### 1. Powering up
- Replug the USB C cable to power up
- Note that the buttons and audio levels are not responsive before connecting to an external network

### 2. Connect to Hotspot

- Using your phone or computer, connect to the WiFi network **"M5Stick-Audio-xxxxx"**
- No password required

### 3. Configure WiFi

- A web page should open automatically (captive portal)
- If not, open your browser and go to: `192.168.4.1`
- Enter your WiFi network credentials:
  - **SSID**: Your WiFi network name
  - **Password**: Your WiFi password
- Click **"Connect"**
- The device will show CONNECTED text for two seconds if successful

### 4. M5Stick Restarts

- The device will restart and connect to your WiFi
- The display will show:
  - Your IP address
  - "Mic: PDM SPM1423" 
  - Audio level indicator
  - Frequency spectrum bars

## WLED Configuration

### 1. Install WLED on Your LED Controller

- Flash the **Sound Reactive** build of WLED to your ESP32/ESP8266  
(New WLED builds have audio reactive included by default)
- Make sure your WLED is in the same network as the sound module

### 2. Configure WLED to Receive Audio

1. Open WLED web interface (http://[your-wled-ip])
2. Go to **Settings** → **Usermods**
3. Set Audioreactive to **"Enable"**
4. In the sync section in the bottom of the page, set mode to **receive**
5. Port should be **11988** (default)
6. Click **Save**
7. **Power cycle** the WLED device (important!)

### 3. Test Audio Sync

1. Play music near the M5StickC
2. Watch the M5Stick display - audio levels should move
3. In WLED, go to **Info** tab
4. Look for "Audio source" showing the M5Stick's IP
5. Verify packet counter is increasing
6. Try audio-reactive effects in WLED!

## Usage

### Display Information

```
TX ON                  ← Transmission status
IP: 192.168.1.55      ← M5Stick IP address
Mic: PDM SPM1423      ← Microphone type
AGC: ON (45.2x)       ← Auto gain (current multiplier)
Lvl: 175/180          ← Current level / Target level
Pkts: 1234            ← Packets sent

Signal:
████████░░░░          ← Audio level bar (with blue target line)

Freq:
▂▃▅▇█▇▅▃▂            ← Frequency spectrum (16 bins)
```

### Button Controls

#### Button A (Front M5 Button)
- **Single press**: Toggle transmission ON/OFF
- **Hold 4 seconds**: Reset WiFi settings (returns to setup mode)

#### Button B (Side Button)
- **Single press**: Toggle AGC ON/OFF or cycle manual gain presets
  - AGC ON → Manual 10x → 20x → 30x → 50x → 80x → 120x → AGC ON
- **Hold 1 second**: Adjust backlight brightness (3 → 6 → 9 → 12 → 15)

AGC automatically adjusts microphone sensitivity based on room volume:

The blue vertical line on the signal bar shows the AGC target level (180/255).

**Status Colors:**
- 🟢 **Green bar** (0-85): Good signal level
- 🟡 **Yellow bar** (85-200): Optimal range
- 🔴 **Red bar** (200-255): Too loud, may clip

## Troubleshooting

### Can't Connect to WLED

- Verify both devices are on the **same WiFi network**
- Check WLED is set to **"Receive"** mode
- Make sure you power cycled WLED after changing settings
- Check WLED **Info** tab for "Audio source" field

### WiFi Connection Failed

- M5StickC only supports **2.4GHz WiFi** (not 5GHz)
- Double-check password (case-sensitive)
- Hold Button A for 2 seconds to reset WiFi and try again
- Try connecting to a simpler network (no special characters)

### Battery

- I haven't been able to test this using the internal battery, I'm not sure if it's a problem with the code or my device which is quite old

## Specifications

- **Sample Rate**: 16 kHz (optimized for SPM1423 PDM microphone)
- **Frequency Bins**: 16 (for WLED spectrum effects)
- **UDP Port**: 11988 (WLED default)
- **Protocol**: WLED Audio Sync v2
- **Latency**: 15-25ms typical
- **Range**: Standard WiFi range
- **Supported WLED**: Unlimited receivers simultaneously


## Advanced Configuration

### Adjusting AGC Parameters

Edit these values in the code for different scenarios:

```cpp
#define AGC_TARGET_LEVEL 180    // Target level (150-220)
#define AGC_MIN_GAIN 5.0        // Minimum gain multiplier
#define AGC_MAX_GAIN 200.0      // Maximum gain multiplier
#define AGC_ATTACK_RATE 0.05    // How fast gain increases
#define AGC_DECAY_RATE 0.001    // How fast gain decreases
```

### Adjusting Signal to noise ratio

If there is noise in the signal (lights are reacting when there is no sound), edit this line:

```cpp
#define SQUELCH 50
```
Higher = more agressive filtering


**Presets:**
- **Live Music**: Target 200, Attack 0.1, Decay 0.005
- **Ambient/Background**: Target 160, Attack 0.03, Decay 0.001
- **Movies/TV**: Target 170, Attack 0.08, Decay 0.003

### Multiple WLED Devices

The M5Stick broadcasts to **all WLED devices** on your network. To control multiple LED strips:

1. Set all WLED devices to "Receive" mode
2. All will sync to the same audio source automatically
3. No additional configuration needed!

### Specific IP Target (Optional)

To send only to one specific WLED device instead of broadcast:

```cpp
// Change this line:
IPAddress broadcastIP(255, 255, 255, 255);

// To your WLED device IP:
IPAddress broadcastIP(192, 168, 1, 100);
```

## Advanced Configuration

Issues:
- The battery is not working, maybe an issue with my unit?
- The screen is flickering, help from here? [link](https://community.m5stack.com/topic/2409/avoid-lcd-flicker-when-updating-text-on-m5stickc)

Commit message:

Update README with latency adjustment information
Added section on adjusting latency and its effects.

README.md, after:

# M5StickC - WLED Audio Sync Source

This firmware for M5StickC uses the built-in SPM1423 PDM microphone to capture audio and sends it to WLED-enabled ESP devices via UDP for synchronized audio-reactive lighting effects.  
This firmware is built for the original M5StickC, and has not been tested with M5StickC Plus nor Plus v2

The code has been fully generated with Claude AI and has been tested for bugs.

## Features

**Automatic Gain Control (AGC)** - Automatically adapts to room volume  
**Built-in Microphone** - Uses M5StickC internal SPM1423 PDM mic  
**WiFi Configuration Portal** - Input wifi credentials in browser
**Real-time Display** - Audio levels and frequency spectrum visualization  
**Manual Controls** - Adjust gain, brightness, and transmission on/off  

## Requirements

- **M5StickC ** 
- **WLED Device** 
- **WiFi Network** - 2.4GHz 

## Installation

### Using Arduino Cloud Editor 

1. **Go to Arduino Cloud Editor**  
   Visit: https://create.arduino.cc/

2. **Create Account** (if you don't have one)  
   Free account required

3. **Install Arduino Create Agent**  
   - Small plugin (~30MB) that enables USB communication

6. **Create New Sketch**
   - Click **"New Sketch"**
   - Delete any default code

8. **Connect M5StickC**
   - Connect via USB-C cable
   - Select board: ESP32 Dev Module

7. **Copy the Firmware**
   - Copy the entire contents of `M5StickC_WLED_Audio.ino`
   - Paste into the editor

10. **Upload**
    - Click the **Upload** button (→ arrow)
    - Wait ~30-60 seconds
    - Look for "Success" message

### Alternative Installation Methods

This firmware can also be installed using ArduinoIDE or PlatformIO

## First Time Setup

### 1. Powering up
- Replug the USB C cable to power up
- Note that the buttons and audio levels are not responsive before connecting to an external network

### 2. Connect to Hotspot

- Using your phone or computer, connect to the WiFi network **"M5Stick-Audio-xxxxx"**
- No password required

### 3. Configure WiFi

- A web page should open automatically (captive portal)
- If not, open your browser and go to: `192.168.4.1`
- Enter your WiFi network credentials:
  - **SSID**: Your WiFi network name
  - **Password**: Your WiFi password
- Click **"Connect"**
- The device will show CONNECTED text for two seconds if successful

### 4. M5Stick Restarts

- The device will restart and connect to your WiFi
- The display will show:
  - Your IP address
  - "Mic: PDM SPM1423" 
  - Audio level indicator
  - Frequency spectrum bars

## WLED Configuration

### 1. Install WLED on Your LED Controller

- Flash the **Sound Reactive** build of WLED to your ESP32/ESP8266  
(New WLED builds have audio reactive included by default)
- Make sure your WLED is in the same network as the sound module

### 2. Configure WLED to Receive Audio

1. Open WLED web interface (http://[your-wled-ip])
2. Go to **Settings** → **Usermods**
3. Set Audioreactive to **"Enable"**
4. In the sync section in the bottom of the page, set mode to **receive**
5. Port should be **11988** (default)
6. Click **Save**
7. **Power cycle** the WLED device (important!)

### 3. Test Audio Sync

1. Play music near the M5StickC
2. Watch the M5Stick display - audio levels should move
3. In WLED, go to **Info** tab
4. Look for "Audio source" showing the M5Stick's IP
5. Verify packet counter is increasing
6. Try audio-reactive effects in WLED!

## Usage

### Display Information

```
TX ON                  ← Transmission status
IP: 192.168.1.55      ← M5Stick IP address
Mic: PDM SPM1423      ← Microphone type
AGC: ON (45.2x)       ← Auto gain (current multiplier)
Lvl: 175/180          ← Current level / Target level
Pkts: 1234            ← Packets sent

Signal:
████████░░░░          ← Audio level bar (with blue target line)

Freq:
▂▃▅▇█▇▅▃▂            ← Frequency spectrum (16 bins)
```

### Button Controls

#### Button A (Front M5 Button)
- **Single press**: Toggle transmission ON/OFF
- **Hold 4 seconds**: Reset WiFi settings (returns to setup mode)

#### Button B (Side Button)
- **Single press**: Toggle AGC ON/OFF or cycle manual gain presets
  - AGC ON → Manual 10x → 20x → 30x → 50x → 80x → 120x → AGC ON
- **Hold 1 second**: Adjust backlight brightness (3 → 6 → 9 → 12 → 15)

AGC automatically adjusts microphone sensitivity based on room volume:

The blue vertical line on the signal bar shows the AGC target level (180/255).

**Status Colors:**
- 🟢 **Green bar** (0-85): Good signal level
- 🟡 **Yellow bar** (85-200): Optimal range
- 🔴 **Red bar** (200-255): Too loud, may clip

## Troubleshooting

### Can't Connect to WLED

- Verify both devices are on the **same WiFi network**
- Check WLED is set to **"Receive"** mode
- Make sure you power cycled WLED after changing settings
- Check WLED **Info** tab for "Audio source" field

### WiFi Connection Failed

- M5StickC only supports **2.4GHz WiFi** (not 5GHz)
- Double-check password (case-sensitive)
- Hold Button A for 2 seconds to reset WiFi and try again
- Try connecting to a simpler network (no special characters)

### Battery

- I haven't been able to test this using the internal battery, I'm not sure if it's a problem with the code or my device which is quite old

## Specifications

- **Sample Rate**: 16 kHz (optimized for SPM1423 PDM microphone)
- **Frequency Bins**: 16 (for WLED spectrum effects)
- **UDP Port**: 11988 (WLED default)
- **Protocol**: WLED Audio Sync v2
- **Latency**: 15-25ms typical
- **Range**: Standard WiFi range
- **Supported WLED**: Unlimited receivers simultaneously


## Advanced Configuration

### Adjusting AGC Parameters

Edit these values in the code for different scenarios:

```cpp
#define AGC_TARGET_LEVEL 180    // Target level (150-220)
#define AGC_MIN_GAIN 5.0        // Minimum gain multiplier
#define AGC_MAX_GAIN 200.0      // Maximum gain multiplier
#define AGC_ATTACK_RATE 0.05    // How fast gain increases
#define AGC_DECAY_RATE 0.001    // How fast gain decreases
```

### Adjusting Signal to noise ratio

If there is noise in the signal (lights are reacting when there is no sound), edit this line:

```cpp
#define SQUELCH 50
```
Higher = more agressive filtering

### Adjusting latency
- To adjust latency you need to change sample size in code and also update the FFT array sizes. The default sample size is 256 samples and theoretically it cause around 16ms of latency (with 16khz)
- In practice, there are many factors that are affecting latency and i was able to test around 150ms of latency.

**Presets:**
- **Live Music**: Target 200, Attack 0.1, Decay 0.005
- **Ambient/Background**: Target 160, Attack 0.03, Decay 0.001
- **Movies/TV**: Target 170, Attack 0.08, Decay 0.003

### Multiple WLED Devices

The M5Stick broadcasts to **all WLED devices** on your network. To control multiple LED strips:

1. Set all WLED devices to "Receive" mode
2. All will sync to the same audio source automatically
3. No additional configuration needed!

### Specific IP Target (Optional)

To send only to one specific WLED device instead of broadcast:

```cpp
// Change this line:
IPAddress broadcastIP(255, 255, 255, 255);

// To your WLED device IP:
IPAddress broadcastIP(192, 168, 1, 100);
```

## Advanced Configuration

Issues:
- The battery is not working, maybe an issue with my unit?
- The screen is flickering, help from here? [link](https://community.m5stack.com/topic/2409/avoid-lcd-flicker-when-updating-text-on-m5stickc)
